[ADR - 43] blockchain riri-org (#3753)
tendermint/tendermint: docs/architecture/adr-042-blockchain-riri-org.md

# ADR 042: Blockhchain Reactor Riri-Org

## Changelog
* 18-06-2019: Initial draft

## Context

> The blockchain reactor is responsible for two high level processes:sending/receiving blocks from peers and FastSync-ing blocks to catch upnode who is far behind.  The goal of[ADR-40](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/develop/docs/architecture/adr-040-blockchain-reactor-refactor.md) was to refactor these twoprocesses by seperating business logic currently wrapped up ingo-channels into pure `handle*` functions.  While the ADR specified what the final formof the reactor might look like it lacked guidance on intermediary stepsto get there. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The blockchain reactor is responsible for two high level processes:sending/receiving blocks from peers and FastSync-ing blocks to catch upnode who is far behind.  The goal of[ADR-40](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/develop/docs/architecture/adr-040-blockchain-reactor-refactor.md) was to refactor these two processes by separating business logic currently wrapped up ingo-channels into pure `handle*` functions.  While the ADR specified what the final form of the reactor might look like it lacked guidance on intermediary steps to get there. 
```

The following diagram illustrates the state of the

[blockchain-reorg](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/pull/35610),which will be refered to as `v1`

![v1 Blockchain Reactor Architecture
Diagram](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/f9e556481654a24aeb689bdadaf5eab3ccd66829/docs/architecture/img/blockchain-reactor-v1.png)

> While `v1` of the blockchan reactor has shown significant improvementsin erms of simplifying the concurrency model, the current PR has runinto few roadblocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While `v1` of the blockchain reactor has shown significant improvements in terms of simplifying the concurrency model, the current PR has run into few roadblocks.
```

* The current PR large and difficult to review.
* Block gossiping and fast sync processes are highly coupled to the shared `Pool` data structure.
* Peer communication is spread over multiple components creating complex dependency graph which must be mocked out during testing.
* Timeouts modeled as stateful tickers introduce non-determinism in tests

## Decision

> Partition the responsibilities of the blockchain reactor into a set ofcomponents which communicate exclusively with events. Events will containtimestamps allowing each component to track time as internal state.Internal state will be mutated by a set of `handle*` which will produce event(s).The integration between components will happen in the reactor andreactor tests will then become integration tests between components. This design will be known as `v2`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Partition the responsibilities of the blockchain reactor into a set of components which communicate exclusively with events. Events will contain timestamps allowing each component to track time as internal state. The internal state will be mutated by a set of `handle*` which will produce event(s). The integration between components will happen in the reactor and reactor tests will then become integration tests between components. This design will be known as `v2`
```

> # ADR 042: Blockhchain Reactor Riri-Org

Reviewer 2: ADR numbers should be registered in #2313 before being used. Just edit the comment there to add a new one.

                break;
        }
    }
}
```

## Lifecycle management

A set of routines for individual processes allow processes to run in parallel with clear lifecycle management. `Start`, `Stop`, and `AddPeer` hooks currently present in the reactor will delegate to the sub-routines allowing them to manage internal state independant without further coupling to the reactor.

```go
func (r *BlockChainReactor) Start() {
    r.msgs := make(chan Message, maxInFlight)
    schedulerMsgs := make(chan Message)
    processorMsgs := make(chan Message)
    ioMsgs := make(chan Message)

    go processorRoutine(processorMsgs, r.msgs)
    go scheduleRoutine(schedulerMsgs, r.msgs)
    go ioRoutine(ioMsgs, r.msgs)
    ...
}

...
func (r *BlockchainReactor) Stop() {
    ...
    r.msgs <- stop
    ...
}
...

func (r *BlockchainReactor) AddPeer(peer p2p.Peer) {
    ...
    r.msgs <- bcAddPeerEv{peer.ID}
    ...
}

```

## IO handling
An io handling routine within the reactor will isolate peer communication.

```go
func (r *BlockchainReacor) ioRoutine(chan ioMsgs, ...) {
    ...
    for {
        msg := <-ioMsgs
        switch msg := msg.(type) {
            case scBlockRequestMessage:

>                 r.sendBlockToPeer(...)

Reviewer 3: what if IO is slow? won't this slow down `demuxRoutine` in effect?

Author: IIRC this goes down results in a `peer.TrySend` which are queued and sent later until the queue fills up. Similar to the comment above, we can use the return value from trySend to send `stopScheduling` messages to the `scheduler` until the queue flushes.

>                 r.sendBlockToPeer(...)

Reviewer 4: Could you add a comment on how this is handled in the IoRoutine?

            case scStatusRequestMessage
                r.sendStatusResponseToPeer(...)
            case bcPeerError
                r.Swtich.StopPeerForError(msg.src)
                ...
            ...
            case bcFinished
                break;
        }
    }
}

```
### Processor internals 

The processor will be responsible for validating and processing blocks.
The Processor will maintain an internal cursor `height` of the last
processed block. As a set of unordered blocks arrive, the the Processor
will check if it has `height+1` nessary to process the next block.

```go
type Proccesor struct {
    height ...
    state ...

>     blocks [height]*Block

Reviewer 3: how many blocks will be stored in the worst case?

Author: Good point. The worst case would be unbounded. We can look to provide back pressure by counting unprocessed messages and sending `stopScheduling` messages to the `scheduler` when we exceed some threshold. Was this your concern?

Reviewer 3: Yeah. I was thinking if there are any ways for malicious peer (group of peers) to exploit this.

Reviewer 5: We shouldn't be using len() on channels to "provide backpressure".  It should only be used in certain cases... (1) when you're the only reader routine, and you want to ensure that there exists something in the channel before trying something, but otherwise not pull from it.  Even still, a value of len()=0 does not mean that a pull will fail.  (2) for gathering statistics that does not affect the logic.  Even if there was a save way to ensure that there is space in a channel before pushing to it, such a method would not be safe in the face of concurrent pushes to that channel.  In other words, even if it works today, it is brittle and can easily break for a variety of reasons in the future.

https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/golang-nuts/yQw1Wx6BoUU

The only good general way to deal with fullness of channels is to use select{default:}.

Author: This design has evolved with the implementation to resolve a bunch of these open questions. In particular we explicitly use [priority queue](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/blockchain/v2/routine.go#L22] within the each which is now bounded.

Reviewer 5: I'm not seeing anything that is bounding the size of the queue.  bufferSize is used as a hint in constructing a priority queue.  The `// XXX backpressure` comment and issue still exists in reactor.go.

Also, https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/4142

    peers[height]PeerID
    lastTouch timestamp
}

func (proc *Processor) handleBlockResponse(peerID, block, time) {
    lastTouch = time
    if block.height < height {
        // skip
    } else if blocks[block.height] {
        return errDuplicateBlock{}
    } else  {
        blocks[block.height] = block
    }

    if blocks[height] && blocks[height+1] {
        ... = processBlock(blocks[height], blocks[height+1])
         bcR.store.SaveBlock(first, firstParts, second.LastCommit)
        ... = proc.state.Validators.VerifyCommit
        delete blocks[height]
        height++
    }
    return pcBlockProcessed{height}
}

func (proc *Processor) handleRemovePeer(peerID) {
    events = []
    // Delete all unprocessed blocks from peerID
    for i = height; i < len(blocks); i++ {
        if peers[i] == peerID {
            events = append(events, pcBlockReschedule{height})
            delete block[height]
        }
    }
    return events
}

> 

Author: From my understanding, The processor is responsible for removing/rescheduling all unprocessed block received from an errored peer. Is that true?

> 

Reviewer 4: IMHO we need to clarify this. Looks like both the processor and the scheduler maintain some information about the fast sync peers and blocks. They may both detect errors and trigger peer removal and eventually the rescheduling of requests. Crossing messages may cause their view of peers and blocks to get out of sync. At this point the scheduler struct is not filled in, also how the actual scheduling works is missing. I think we need more details on the scheduler and then make the analysis.

> 

Reviewer 6: > The processor is responsible for removing/rescheduling all unprocessed block received from an errored peer. Is that true?
One way to think about Processor is that it should order, verify and execute blocks. If it fails by doing this for some block it will notify scheduler (and io) about error so they can do corresponding actions.

func handleTimeCheckEv(time) {
    if time - lastTouch > timeout {
        // Timeout the processor
        ...
    }
}
```

## Schedule
The scheduler (previously the pool) is responsible for squeding peer status requests and block request responses.

```go
type schedule {
    ...
}

type Scheduler struct {
    ...
    schedule schedule{}
}

func addPeer(peerID) {
	schedule.addPeer(peerID)
}

func handleStatusResponse(peerID, height, time) {
	schedule.touchPeer(peerID, time)
	schedule.setPeerHeight(peerID, height)
}

func handleBlockResponseMessage(peerID, height, block, time) {
	schedule.touchPeer(peerID, time)
	schedule.markReceived(peerID, height, size(block))
}

func handleNoBlockResponseMessage(peerID, height, time) {
	schedule.touchPeer(peerID, time)
    // reschedule that block, punish peer...
    ...
}

func handleTimeCheckEv(time) {
	// clean peer list

    events = []

> 	for peerID := range schedule.peersTouchedSince(time) {

Author: This loop is intended to iterate over peers that have timed out, change their state to timed out and reschedule blocks pending from those timed out peer to other peers.

		pending = schedule.pendingFrom(peerID) 
		schedule.setPeerState(peerID, timedout)
		schedule.resetBlocks(pending)
		events = append(events, peerTimeout{peerID})
    }

	events = append(events, schedule.getSchedule())

    return events
}
```

## Peer
The Peer Stores per peer state based on messages received by the scheduler.

```go
type Peer struct {
	lastTouched timestamp
	lastDownloaded timestamp
	pending map[height]struct{}
	height height // max height for the peer
	state {
		pending,   // we know the peer but not the height
		active,    // we know the height
		timeout    // the peer has timed out
	}
}
```

> 

Author: Yes I think we the `schedule.peersNotTouchedSince` loop could be done on `schedule.peersSlowerThan(minSpeed)` to prune peers in a more sophisticated way. It could be as simple as that  or if we may eventually need something more sophisticated. We could have a sort of `PeerPruning` strategy which could be applied to the schedule. Not sure if that's needed now or if we need to emit events indicating why the peer was pruned 🤔.

> 

Reviewer 4: Both v0 and v1 have a monitor and remove slow peers. Events are sent to the switch to remove the slow peer. It is probably ok if we want to leave this aside initially for this refactor.

> 

Author: 👍 Yeah I think we can do this without much trouble.
